new Transport guide (#60)
smartdevicelink/sdl_core_guides: docs/Transport Manager Programming/index.md

# Transport Progamming Guide

> Hello, this guide will explain how transports work in SDL Core. We will highlight the responsibilities of each interface as well as look at some examples of transports already implemented in SDL Core. First let's take a look at Figure 1, a diagram showing the structure of the main transport components and then we will work our way down the diagram describing each component.

Reviewer: Drop the hello :)

Reviewer: Change structure to "hierarchy"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will explain how transports work in SDL Core. We will highlight the responsibilities of each interface as well as look at some examples of transports already implemented in SDL Core. Below is a diagram showing the hierarchy of SDL Core's transport component. From the top level we will work our way down and describe each subcomponent.
```

|||
Figure 1: Transport Overview
![TAStructure](./assets/tastructure.png)
|||

## Transport Manager

> The Transport Manager is responsible for the sending and receiving of data, as well as the connecting and disconnecting of devices. These responsibilities are abstracted away by Transport Adapters. A Transport Manager can contain any number of Transport Adapters, each of which is responsible for handling communication via one type of transport, such as TCP or Bluetooth. The Transport Manager also contains data necessary to handle its responsibilities, such as a mapping of each device to the Transport Adapter it uses to communicate. Other components within Core are also able to register a Transport Manager Listener with the manager, which will receive events from the Transport Manager. The default Transport Manager follows the singleton pattern, but this is not necessary if you would like to use a custom solution.

Reviewer: I would mention that the transport manager is responsible for receiving events from other components in sdl core (application manager, connection handler, i think protocol handler too) and propogates those events to the transport adapters. The transport manager is also responsible for routing outgoing messages to the proper transport adapter based on the the device connection.

Reviewer: > These responsibilities are abstracted away by Transport Adapters.

I don't think that necessarily true. Transport manager routes events to and from the proper transport adapters.

Author: What do you think about changing it to 

> The fine details of these responsibilities are abstracted away by Transport Adapters.

I want to convey that the Manager mostly routes commands to the adapters.

Reviewer: I think thats better but I still think the keyword to use somehow is route/routing/router

#### Transport Manager Structure

|||

> Figure 2: Transport Manager UML Diagram

Reviewer: I would talk more about this diagram. Also this diagram might need updating. There is no transport manager listener implementation class for example. The protocol handler and the connection handler are the two classes that implement that interface.

Reviewer: Yea the TransportAdapterListnerImplementation communicates specific events to the transport manager on behalf of the transport adapter. I dont think the transport adapter actually implements the transport adapter listener interface. 

This diagram might be wrong and is confusing. Not sure if it is showing the inheritance hierarchy, or how data is supposed to "flow" through the components.

Author: It's UML so it shows inheritance. I will add some basic UML information underneath in an !!!NOTE block. I didn't find any of this diagram to be incorrect, but I will take another look to make sure it's not causing more confusion than it's worth.

Author: Inside the UML refresher note, I added the language

> Implementation (*Impl) classes only represent concretions and may not actually be named the same in the SDL core project.

In the header above the two UML figures, I changed `* Structure` to `* Inheritance Structure`.

These two changes should clear up that this is just showing the inheritance structure.

![TM](./assets/tm.png)
|||

## Transport Adapter

> Each Transport Adapter is responsible for one specific type of transmitting data, such as TCP or Bluetooth. The Transport Adapter will contain the code to connect and disconnet devices, as well as transfer data. Many of the existing Transport Adapters also implement workers such as a Device Scanner, a Client Connection Listener, or a Server Connection Factory. Currently, Transport Adapters are registered with the Transport Manager within the `TransportManagerDefault::Init()` method; you can add code here to include your custom Transport Adapter. Depending on your implementation, most of the funtionality of the Transport Adapter will likely live in the workers. Two big functions that will for sure need to be implemented in a Transport Adapter are Store() and Restore() which are used to save and resume the state of the Adapter. In the case of the TCP Transport Adapter, the Store() function will save a list of devices' names and addresses, along with the applications each device was running and their corresponding port number. When resuming, Restore() will reconnect to the devices saved in the last state and resumes communication with the the applications on each device. Similar to Transport Managers, other components in Core are able to register a Transport Adapter Listener with a Transport Adapter to later receive events from the Adapter such as `OnDeviceAdded`.

Reviewer: Each Transport Adapter is responsible for one specific type of *connection*

Reviewer: connect and disconnect devices, as well as send and receive data.

Reviewer: ~Many of the existing Transport Adapters also implement workers such as a Device Scanner, a Client Connection Listener, or a Server Connection Factory.~

Depending on the transport type, a transport adapter may implement subcomponents such as a Device Scanner, a Client Connection Listener, and a Server Connection Factory. 

Make sure those components are explained later too

Reviewer: >`TransportManagerDefault::Init()` method;

Would be good to link to that method on github

Reviewer: ...save and resume the state of the Adapter in case there is an unexpected disconnect or SDL Core is restarted.

Reviewer: > Similar to Transport Managers, other components in Core are able to register a Transport Adapter Listener with a Transport Adapter to later receive events from the Adapter such as `OnDeviceAdded`.

I would move this to some place else. Its confusing that it is the last sentence of a large paragraph before a code example that does not have to do with a listener.

void TcpTransportAdapter::Store() const {
  Json::Value devices_dictionary;

  for (Device* tcp_device : GetDeviceList()) {
    if (!tcp_device) { continue; } // device could have been disconnected

    Json::Value device_dictionary;
    device_dictionary["name"] = tcp_device->name();
    device_dictionary["address"] = tcp_device->in_addr();

    Json::Value applications_dictionary;
    for (ApplicationHandle app_handle : tcp_device->GetApplicationList()) {
      if (FindEstablishedConnection(tcp_device->unique_device_id(),
                                    app_handle)) {
        int port = tcp_device->GetApplicationPort(app_handle);
        if (port != -1) {  // don't want to store incoming applications
          applications_dictionary.append(std::string(port));
        }
      }
    }

    if (!applications_dictionary.empty()) {
      device_dictionary["applications"] = applications_dictionary;
      devices_dictionary.append(device_dictionary);
    }
  }

  Json::Value& dict = last_state().get_dictionary();
  dict["TransportManager"]["TcpAdapter"]["devices"] = devices_dictionary;
}
```

#### Transport Adapter Structure

|||
Figure 3: Transport Adapter UML Diagram

> ![TA](./assets/ta.png)

Reviewer: There is a lot going on in this picture. Is this a inheritance diagram or showing communication between components or both? I think the dotted lines mean the component inherits from that interface, while the solid lines show ownership of that class as a class property? 

Image could use some prefacing

Author: I will put the same UML infos next to this diagram and again ensure this picture is not causing more confusion than it's worth.

|||

### Transport Adapter Workers

> The Device Scanner is responsible for scanning for new devices to connect with. When a device is found, this worker is responsible for alerting the Transport Adapter, as well as alerting the Transport Manager via the Transport Adapter Listener. Next, the Transport Manager will instruct the Transport Adapter to connect with the devices.

Reviewer: Mention the bluetooth transport adapter as being the best example of a device scanner implementation since Core must perform a bluetooth SDP (service discovery protocol i think) to find bluetooth services advertising the SDL bluetooth UUID.

Author: I mention this in the subcomponent's section, should I also add it to the summary here?

Reviewer: Ah that should be ok then. Change is up to you.

Author: I'll look into putting a list of components that use each worker so people have a quick reference

> The Client Connection Listener implements receiving a connection that is originated by a device. This will typically wait for connection from a device, then establish that connection, finally alerting the Transport Manager via the Transport Manager Listener of the newly connected device and app IDs.

Reviewer: Mention USB and TCP are examples of adapters that implement this scheme.

Author: I mention this in the subcomponent's section, should I also add it to the summary here?

Reviewer: same as above, up to you.

> The Server Connection Factory implements a connection that is originated from Core. For example, Core reaches out to a predefined web address to start a cloud application. This type of communication requires that the Transport Adapter knows of the device and application in advance. When this connection is created, the Transport Adapter will alert the Transport Manager of the new devices and applications in a similar fashion to other workers.

Reviewer: USB and bluetooth are additional examples that implement this subcomponent.

Depending on what your type of transport is, whether Core will be the server or the client, you will likely implement either the Client Connection Listener or the Server Connection Factory.

> #### Client Connection Listener

Reviewer: I would put these TA worker sections in the order that you first mentioned them above.

> Since the TCP Transport Adapter is running a server that clients will connect to, much of the implementation lives in the Client Connection Listener. The Client Connection Listener has a fair few functions to implement, let’s start with Init(). 

Reviewer: Preface with "Using the TCP Transport Adapter as an example for a client connection listener implementation..." or something like that

Reviewer: ~fair~

```
// tcp_client_listener.cc
// Code has been simplified and whitespace has been added for readability.
// Thank you to Sho Amano for the helpful comments.

> TransportAdapter::Error TcpClientListener::Init() {

Reviewer: I think it would be helpful to link to where this code comes from on github

Author: I am not sure it would be super helpful for a couple reasons:
- we can only link to a line (more maintaining)
- this code looks very different than what is actually on github (might be more confusing)
- if someone is reading this guide, they can probably find this code pretty quick, right?

Let me know if you still think I should add it...

Reviewer: Good points.. Maybe the better solution would be to link to some of the important transport classes at the end of the guide?

Author: I added a few links throughout, everywhere I mention a specific component. Lmk where you think more would help

    LOG("TcpClientListener is not running now");
    return TransportAdapter::BAD_STATE;
  }

  interface_listener_->Stop();

  StopListeningThread();

  started_ = false;
  LOG("Tcp client listener was stopped successfully");
  return TransportAdapter::OK;
}
```

The StopListening() and SuspendListening() functions do about the opposite, both stop the TCP Client Listener delegate thread and then set `started_` to false. The difference between the two functions on the TCP Client Listener is that StopListening() will also stop the Platform Specific Network Interface Listener's delegate thread. When SuspendListening() is called, SDL will not be able to create new connections, but existing connections are still able to communicate data. StopListening() will also kill communication with existing connections.

#### Server Connection Factory

The Server Connection Factory has the method CreateConnection() which, provided with a device UID and application handle, creates a connection to the application, and then should call ConnectionCreated() on the Transport Adapter.

```
// tcp_connection_factory.cc
// Code has been simplified and whitespace has been added for readability.

> TransportAdapter::Error TcpConnectionFactory::CreateConnection(

Reviewer: I would pick another transport type to explain the CreateConnection. I could be wrong but I dont think the TCPConnectionFactory is ever used?

    const DeviceUID& device_uid, const ApplicationHandle& app_handle) {
  LOG("DeviceUID: " << &device_uid << ", ApplicationHandle: " << &app_handle);

  auto connection = TcpServerOriginatedSocketConnection(
            device_uid, app_handle, controller_);
  controller_->ConnectionCreated(connection, device_uid, app_handle);

  const TransportAdapter::Error error = connection->Start();
  if (TransportAdapter::OK != error) {
    LOG("TCP ServerOriginated connection::Start() failed with error: "
            << error);
  }

  return error;
}
```

#### Device Scanner

The TCP Transport Adapter does not use a device scanner because it waits for incoming connections. We will use the Bluetooth Transport Adapter’s Device Scanner as an example here.

> The Init() function is called once and is responsible for preparing for the lifecycle of your device scanner. Here, the bluetooth device scanner will start the device scanner worker thread. This worker thread will either scan for devices repeatedly or only when requested via a conditional variable.

Reviewer: Mention how the scan by request or auto scan is configured via the device scanner constructor

snippet from the bluetooth device scanner:

```
    , auto_repeat_search_(auto_repeat_search)
    , auto_repeat_pause_sec_(auto_repeat_pause_sec)
```

# Transport Programming Guide

This guide will explain how transports work in SDL Core. We will highlight the responsibilities of each interface as well as look at some examples of transports already implemented in SDL Core. First let's take a look at Figure 1, a diagram showing the hierarchy of the main transport components and then we will work our way down the diagram describing each component.

|||
Figure 1: Transport Overview
![TAStructure](./assets/tastructure.png)
|||

## Transport Manager

> The Transport Manager is responsible for routing commands and messages between the transport adapters and other major components in core. A Transport Manager can contain any number of Transport Adapters, each of which is responsible for handling communication via one type of transport, such as TCP or Bluetooth. The Transport Manager also contains data necessary to handle its responsibilities, such as a mapping of each device to the Transport Adapter it uses to communicate. Other components within Core are also able to register a Transport Manager Listener with the manager, which will receive events from the Transport Manager. The default Transport Manager follows the singleton pattern, but this is not necessary if you would like to use a custom solution.

Reviewer: core -> SDL Core

#### Transport Manager Inheritance Structure

|||
Figure 2: Transport Manager UML Diagram
![TM](./assets/tm.png)
|||

!!! NOTE

> Implementation (*Impl) classes just represent concretions and may not be named the same in the SDL core project.

Reviewer: concretions?

Indicates that a Transport Adapter failed to send a message properly. This could prompt the transport manager to take action that would reconcile the errors. This event is not currently raised to the Transport Manager Listeners.

**OnReceivedDone**

Indicates that a Transport Adapter has successfully received a message. The received data is eventually passed to Transport Manager Listeners which will process that data.

**OnReceivedFail**

Indicates that a Transport Adapter has failed to properly receive a message.

**OnUnexpectedDisconnect**

Indicates that a device has been unexpectedly disconnected. This event could be emitted in the case of a device being disconnected or a connection being aborted. This event will prompt the Transport Manager to remove the disconnected connection.

**OnTransportSwitchRequested**

Indicates that a transport switch has been requested. This will prompt the Transport Manager to begin transport switching.

**OnTransportConfigUpdated**

Indicates that the Transport Config has been updated. This will prompt the Protocol Handler (a Transport Manager Listener) to check for updates to things like the TCP listening address and port.

**OnConnectPending**

> Indicates that a connection is pending. The Transport Manager will then add the connection to the connection list if it has not already been added. In the case of the cloud websocket transport adapter, this event is emitted once a connection with a new device is created.

Reviewer: > In the case of the cloud websocket transport adapter, this event is emitted once a connection with a new device is created.

Technically nothing "connected" yet. Connection wont happen until the user activates the app, which requires a different TA event. 

Change to something like:
> In the case of the cloud websocket transport adapter, this event is emitted once a connection configuration is known to SDL Core before the connection is actually established.
